So now that we've had a
chance to talk about streams,
we've talked about the
various aggregate operations,
data sources.
We've talked about sequential
streams and parallel streams.
We visualized some
of the behaviors.
I've given you a
summary of the benefits.
What I'd like to do now
is talk about Java streams
and compare and contrast
them with other mechanisms
that Java provides.
In particular,
we'll talk about how
it works relative to
Java IO streams, as well
as Java Collections.
So oddly enough, there's
already something
in Java called streams.
These are I/O streams.
And undoubtedly, if you've
done much Java programming,
I'm sure you're very
familiar with Java streams.
It turns out that
Java IO streams
are quite different
from Java streams
even though they both have
the word stream in them.
In particular, they're used
for different purposes.
Obviously, I/O streams
are used to get data
from files of various types,
get it into the program,
do processing, and then
potentially take that data
and write it back out.
So that would be an I/O stream.
Whereas in contrast,
Java streams--
as we'll see-- takes the
data and flows the data
wherever it comes from.
It could come from a file.
It could come from the network.
It could come from some
user input user dialog box
or wherever the command line.
It flows it through a pipeline
of aggregate operations.
You can use I/O streams
and Java streams together
in the same program.
That's not at all uncommon.
In fact, as we get a
little bit further along,
you'll see how the I/O
streams mechanisms in Java--
the various classes that
are part of the I/O streams
abstraction-- actually now have
been enhanced, as of Java 8
and later, with methods that
will turn files into streams.
And this is pretty cool.
When we talk about the factor
methods coming up here,
you'll see how a
number of the input
classes in the I/O
streams model of Java
work nicely with streams.
So they really are very
synergistic despite having
somewhat confusing use
of the word stream.
There's also something
else that you're
familiar with undoubtedly.
We've covered it
in earlier courses.
And that's the concept
of Java collections.
So Java collections,
of course, would
include things like LinkedLists,
and ArrayLists, and HashMaps,
and HashSets, and TreeMaps,
and all those good collections.
These are also different
from Java streams.
So you can see here
on the left-hand side
we have a simple example
of an ArrayList list, which
is basically a dynamically
sizable array whose
elements contain
references to objects
that the ArrayList is
instantiated with using Java's
generic programming mechanisms.
And on the right-hand
side again, we
see Java streams, which
are not quite the same
as we'll see in the second.
So how do these
different abstractions
compare and contrast.
Well, a collection is an
in-memory data structure
that can be used to store,
retrieve, and manipulate
groups of elements.
So as you can see again
here, the ArrayList
has got this dynamic
array that can
be used to add new elements.
In this case, we're going
to have them be points.
But they could be whatever
since it's obviously
a generic collection
that can be parametrized
with all kinds of
different types.
You can sort of
think of a collection
as being like a DVD--
if anybody remembers
what a DVD is
these days in this world
of online streaming.
But a DVD, of course, stored all
the data on the DVD statically.
So the way that a
collection is like a DVD
is that all the content
exists statically.
Though unlike a DVD,
a Java collection
is typically stored in memory.
So it's not persistent.
Whereas a DVD is.
But the idea there is
that all the data already
exists ahead of time.
In contrast, a stream is a
fixed data structure that
processes elements on demand.
And when we say
fixed data structure
we mean that there's
a predefined number
of aggregate operations that
are used to compose the stream.
And the stream can then
manipulate the elements
that it obtains from some data
source, like a collection,
without iterating
over them explicitly.
Whereas with collections, in the
old school way of doing things,
you have to explicitly
iterate over the collection
using a forEach loop or an
iterator or something else.
So in a sense, you can
think of a Java stream
as being somewhat analogous
to the flow of bytes
in a streaming video.
Again, this is just an analogy.
But the basic point here is
that like a streaming video,
the contents in a Java
stream are dynamically
received and processed.
Now, again, just
like a video stream,
unless it's a live
stream, there's
typically a finite duration
of bytes in a stream.
It doesn't go on forever.
If it's a movie or a
song, it has an end.
And that's often very
similar to a Java stream.
So Java Streams can receive the
data dynamically and process it
dynamically.
But in practice, there's
typically a bound to it.
Although, as we said earlier,
you can also have unbounded
streams if you so desire.
There are various
factory methods
that are defined on
Java collections that
can be used to convert the
collection to a stream.
And then there's also
various operations
that are defined on streams that
can take the result of a stream
and turn it back
to a collection.
So this ability to go
from collections to
streams and back is very, very
common in the Java Streams
programming model.
We have a whole
lesson coming up here
shortly on stream creation
operations that demonstrate
all kinds of
factory methods that
can be used to take the
results or take the data--
the input-- or take as the
elements in a Java collection,
and then convert
them into a stream.
The two most common
operations are
stream, which creates a
sequential stream and parallel
stream, which, as
you might expect,
creates a parallel stream.
And there's some
other factor methods
as well that we'll
cover, but those are
some of the most common ones.
Obviously, once you've converted
a collection into a stream,
then it can flow through the
various aggregate operations
that are part of the
pipeline of that stream.
When you hit a
terminal operation,
then there are various
things you can do.
One of which is to apply a
terminal operation known as
collect.
And we'll talk about this
in more detail shortly.
But collect is basically
a terminal operation
that takes a stream
of input elements
and then accumulates them
into something called
a mutable result container.
And this mutable
result container
can then end up yielding
as its output a collection.
So that's basically how you
can take a stream, which
may have come from a collection,
do a bunch of filtering
and transformation
operations on it,
and then end up yielding
a collection again.
And of course, we'll talk
at length about collect
and another very
important set of concepts
called collectors, which
are what are actually
used to collect together
the elements in a stream
to yield a collection
when all is said and done.
Here's a simple example of
manipulating a Java collection.
And let's take a look at a
couple of different approaches.
The approach we're
going to look at first
is kind of a classic Java 8
approach that demonstrates
so-called external iteration.
And then we'll show the
newer approach, of course,
using internal iteration
in Java Streams.
So as you can see in
this particular example,
we have an array of
strings, which in this case
are links to my old
Washington University website.
And I take that array
of strings and turn it
into a list of strings.
And then I go ahead
and I explicitly
iterate through this list of
strings from i equals 0 to i
is less than urls.size,
URLs being the list.
And for every element, I
check to see whether or not
the URL contains the
substring cse.wustl, which
is my Washington
University website address.
And if it doesn't contain
that, I just continue--
I just skip over it.
If it does contain that
substring, then I go ahead
and I get that
value and I replace
cse.wustl with
dre.vanderbilt, which
is my new Vanderbilt account--
or newer Vanderbilt account.
I've been there almost 20 years.
So I guess it isn't new anymore.
And in that case, I
update that substring.
And then I set that back
into the URL's parameters,
URL variable.
So that's the old school
way of doing things
with Java collections.
The use of external
iteration here,
while somewhat clunky and
cumbersome as we'll see,
does enable some fine grained
control of loop behavior.
As you can see here, if we
don't contain that substring,
we continue.
So it jumps to the
next loop iteration.
Here in contrast
is how we would use
the equivalent sequential
streams approach
using a fluent interface.
So this is a fluid
interface programming style,
internal iteration, and
chaining of transformations
to accomplish the same
behavior that we just
looked at here with the more
classic way of doing things.
So as you can see
here, what we do
is we will start by using the
of factory method on the stream
interface to convert the
urlArray into a stream.
So that will then
create a stream.
And henceforth,
we will implicitly
iterate through that
stream, which started out
with a collection source.
And then what we
do is we only allow
elements in that stream to
continue if they contain
the cse.wustl substring.
So we filter out anything
that doesn't contain that.
And then we go ahead and
map the resulting stream.
At this point, we only
have basically strings
that contain the
cse.wustl substring.
And we can then go ahead
and replace cse.wustl
with dre.vanderbilt.
That's what map does.
And map of course then
generates a stream
of modified strings that
replace the Wash U. address
with the Vanderbilt address.
And then the final
piece of the puzzle
here is we use a
terminal operation called
collect to take that
stream of strings
and convert it into a list.
And that list here is
implemented as an array list.
But the point is we get
back a list of results.
And there's just a whole bunch
of benefits of doing this.
We end up with a list of
results just like we did before.
But the nice thing
is that we didn't
have to worry about all the
low level details of dealing
with the array lists.
We don't have to worry about
having explicit iteration.
We don't have to have loops.
We don't have to
have if statements.
You can read this
thing top to bottom
in a much more intuitive
and convenient way,
as far as I'm concerned.
Interestingly enough,
like iterators,
the elements in a stream
can only be visited once
during its lifetime.
If you want to do
other operations,
you have to start over again
and regenerate the stream
from the data source.
We'll come back and talk about
this a little bit later when
we discuss some of
the traps and pitfalls
and common mistakes of
programming with streams.
That's certainly
a mistake I made
when I was beginning to program
with this back in the day.
One of the other nice things
about using Java Streams is it
greatly simplifies the
chaining of transformations.
So let's say for
sake of argument
we wanted to move from
using a list of strings
to a list of URLs.
All we need to do there,
in this case, is simply
add another map
operation which will
go ahead and apply the
constructor reference for URL.
So what this is
basically doing is
it's taking a stream of
strings that have been filtered
and replaced and converting
that stream of strings
into a stream of URLs.
And notice how simple and
trivial it is to do that.
We just add one other map
operation, and away we go.
This particular example
also illustrates
the use of something
called exception laundering
to convert a constructor
reference that
expects to have a checked
exception in its signature
into one that expects to
have a runtime exception.
And this is something
called rethrowFunction.
And you can read more about
this at the Stack Overflow link
at the bottom of the page
to learn the good, the bad,
and the ugly of doing
exception laundering.
I find it's a pretty cool
technique when using streams
because streams are
really ugly if you
start having to try to combine
exceptions in their processing.